From an economist's perspective, is
there such thing as the disinflationary
boom or the deflationary boom even?
>> So, this is about you know, making a
distinction between now and what comes
next.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, clearly it is about the high levels
of investment.
>> Right. Like clearly right now it's
pushing everything up. But let's imagine
10 years from now and we've done it. We
have this incredible and somehow we've
solved all the sci-fi scenarios so that
the AI doesn't want to kill us all, etc.
Let's just imagine the rosy scenario in
which we have this like incredible
>> under-discussed risk factors in the
software.
>> No, but right. Like let's just say
>> robots don't kill us.
>> Assuming we solve that and the AI works
on our behalf and it does what we want
it to do and it can create incredible
material gains while also make while
also very deliver it cheaply cuz it's
just one AI, etc. Is that a
contemplatable possible
scenario from an economist's
perspective?
>> There is absolutely a scenario where we
could be in that wonderful place with
high productivity growth at the same
time we don't have civil unrest or
>> Right.
>> rogue forces
>> Yeah.
>> using AI for for ill.
That is a scenario, but I do not know a
single person who will put a probability
on that scenario and say that that's
going to happen
you know, with a significant amount of
certainty.
>> Yeah.
>> There is a very high degree of
uncertainty and there are several who
also believe that it's yet to be seen
whether there is going to be any major
productivity gain of the kind that, you
know, there are analysts who believe
that productivity could go up by two
percentage points a year,
you know, over and above what's where it
is right now, which is around two
percentage point a year. I mean, that is
huge.
There is no evidence right now of that
kind of a productivity wave coming
through. So, it's early, but you know, I
use the technology and I
find it terrific. I mean, it is it's
been really great for my own
productivity. Uh it's not affecting my
wages or anything so far, but it's it's
there. It is it is uh
it is uh you know, very valuable
technology, but there is a lot of
uncertainty.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe,
>> [music]
>> the big story of markets right now has
to be one of the big stories, the bond
market sell-off. By the way, as I say
that, I just got this massive feeling of
déjà vu cuz I'm pretty sure we've done a
few episodes where I've started out
saying the exact same line.
>> Well, I mean, one, obviously, this is
sort of one of the trends of our time,
which is that after a decade pre-COVID
where we just sort of assumed that rates
were going to head lower. That is
obviously there's been a regime change
as economists sometimes like to say, and
so now we have rates pushing higher
again. They've come back a little bit in
in the last like couple days, but that's
not really the point. The point is it is
a this global phenomenon around the
world, rates going up. I would still say
probably the big story in markets is AI
and memory and chips. But, if it weren't
for that, everyone would be talking
about interest rates higher in almost
every country in the world.
>> So, here's the thing. I actually think
AI and the rate sell-off is kind of
connected. So,
>> Okay.
>> you know, we're talking about yields
going up generally in developed markets,
and we've seen that recently. I know we
saw, for instance, the the long end of
the UK gilt market hit like the highest
since 1998. The 10-year US Treasury
yield was kind of inching up towards 5%,
but it's come down. Mostly, a lot of
those yields have been moving in line
with the oil price, right? So, a lot of
people will say that this is just
because oil's going up. That's
inflationary, maybe we'll get higher
rates, and so this is why yields have
been backing up. However, there is an
argument, I'm seeing more and more
people make this one, that what's going
on is actually a repricing of something,
you know, less transitory.
>> Yeah.
>> Am I allowed to say that word anymore?
Less transitory and something more
secular
>> Yeah.
>> in what's happening with the rates
market. Something that's more about the
massive amounts of capital that AI is
actually consuming and having a crowding
out effect on sovereign bonds, or maybe
something that's more about, you know,
the ability of the developed world to
actually finance itself in the longer
term. And so you're starting to see some
of those bigger themes creep into the
discussion about the bond market
sell-off. This idea that it's Something
else is happening here. Something more
than the oil price.
>> Totally. Actually, just speaking of the
nexus between interest rates and AI,
Torsten Slok has a good chart out came
out this morning pointing out
essentially that one thing with AI is
the sort of FOMO aspect, not among
investors per se, but about companies
and not wanting to let their models be 6
months behind. And so they'll pay
whatever the cost is to catch up, and
therefore he argues that perhaps higher
rates do not have the slowing effect
that they might have had in another
cycle
>> Mhm.
>> because it's like, well, yeah, it's no
fun to finance this data center at
higher rates, but if the alternative is
being consigned to the permanent
underclass when the other company
builds the most advanced model, you're
going to do it nonetheless. And so, yes,
between oil, between the AI boom,
between demographics and the challenges
of sort of resourcing for care of the
elderly and the infirm, between all of
these things, resource nationalism,
building up thing that we are in this
real secular shift, and we have to
understand it better.
>> Yes, so I am very happy to say we do in
fact have the perfect guest to talk
about all of this. We're going to be
speaking with Gita Gopinath. She is of
course a professor of economics at
Harvard University, but also famously
the first deputy managing director of
the IMF. So truly a perfect guest to
speak to. Someone who's been talking
about, you know, a secular change in the
bond market for quite some time. Gita,
thank you so much for coming on Odd
Lots.
>> A pleasure, Tracy and Joe. Great to be
on your show.
>> So what's your take when you're staring
presumably, you know, on a
minute-by-minute basis at a chart of the
US 10-year yield? What are you thinking?
>> I mean, firstly, I think it's it's
absolutely right to start with the
conversation about what's happening in
bond markets
because frankly, you know, despite all
the many
different shocks going around in the
world, I actually do think the one
that's most worrisome is what we see
with public debt levels everywhere in
the in the world.
In the US, we've seen yields go up. It's
a combination of things. You just talked
about
all of them, which is one is the fact
that inflation is now expected to be
higher.
And there is a sense that the real rate
at which the economy will stay, you
know, at a somewhat stable level of
inflation is higher. So the kind of the
real interest rate has drifted up. The
R-star has drifted up from pre-pandemic
when it was like half a percentage
point. Now it's a 1 percentage point.
But on top of that, you have the premium
that's coming from the risk of
inflation, from very importantly the
large amount of fiscal uh, you know, the
large fiscal deficits that the US is
running and is projected to continue to
run into the foreseeable future. And of
course the third element, which is the
AI
boom and the expenditure, the capital
expenditure that's being undertaken for
that is also shifting the R star rate to
maybe even higher than one percentage
point. So, because of all these reasons,
we've certainly moved away from the
pre-pandemic period of
low for long interest rates and what we
were talking about, you know, the end of
I think we are at
have the end of secular stagnation at
this point.
Secular stagnation was about the fact
that there was not enough investment
happening, especially in the private
sector.
That is no longer an issue anymore. Uh
so, because of the combination of
inflation,
AI boom,
fiscal deficits all over the world, high
public debt everywhere,
you know, we are seeing yields go up and
and that's true in the US, too.
>> What changed? I mean, or I want to drill
into all of these specific things.
But, you know, let's start with like the
high level of public debt. That was a
thing that people were talking about
quite a bit um
prior to the pandemic, as well, and
rates just kept going lower and lower,
including famously in Japan where
uh debt to GDP levels are even much
higher than they are in the Western
world, and that was sort of famously
known as the widow maker trade cuz rates
kept going lower. What changed um
between
2020 pre-2020 and post-2020 such that
this suddenly, in your view and perhaps
the market's view, this became an
important thing that was not perceived
by the market as being important
pre-COVID?
>> Well, a few things changed. Uh one,
the AI boom
is was unexpected. That was not
something that was being priced in
markets pre-pandemic, for sure. That
that big increase in demand for capital
coming from the private sector is one a
big change. The other big change is the
fact that fiscal deficits are now
projected to stay at levels that nobody
was expecting the US to run close to 7%
fiscal deficits for the foreseeable
future. That is the another important
factor. And the third is the composition
of who's the marginal buyer of this
debt. So, we had a period when central
banks everywhere were buying
government debt and that also helped put
keep interest rates low. In fact, that
was part of the strategy of how to
you know, strengthen the economy.
Quantitative easing was part of the
toolkit. And so, that helped keep
interest rates low, but that's changed
and now we have
the central banks everywhere who have
either stopped buying or they're running
it down like it's happening in Japan.
And the marginal buyer are the more
volatile
investors. The hedge funds in the US are
the are the market makers over here. And
so, whenever there are any shifts in
global market conditions, you see a lot
more rate sensitivity than you would
have seen
if it was mainly official
credit flows. And by the way, that's
also true about capital flows coming
into the US. Previously, the buyers of
US Treasuries used to be foreign central
banks.
They're not doing as much anymore.
It's mainly coming from non-bank
financial institutions from the rest of
the world. And so, they're also much
more volatile and fleet is here. You're
going to see just generally higher
volatility in the yield curve.
>> Can you talk a little bit more about the
AI boom because we hear people talk
about a
crowding out effect and I think this is
actually like something that is just
starting to get a lot of attention, but
the proportion of issuance in the
corporate bond market that's coming from
AI companies or AI related, you know,
investment right now is just insane. And
you mentioned Torsten Slok chart.
Torsten is going to be at our upcoming
>> That's right.
>> We're recording this on May 27th. Our
upcoming live show in New York. And so
I've previewed some of the charts he's
going to be sharing there. There's a
chart there that shows
basically the proportion of AI in the
corporate bond market. It's now 50% of
all investment grade issuance um year to
date.
>> Wow.
>> And in even junk-rated debt, it's
creeping up to like almost 40%. So this
is a significant amount of debt that's
being issued into the market. Is it
reasonable to think that investors are
maybe going to think like, well, I'll
buy some big tech mega cap IG debt
versus a US Treasury?
>> At least when we look at the pricing in
markets, that seems to be the case.
Especially when it comes to equities.
You You everybody wants to have a piece
of the AI boom.
Uh and yes, I think there is that
sense that well, this is a sector where
we could really see real gains,
especially, you know, in terms of
productivity increases and
profitability.
And that's going to help. That's going
to be
some you know, something that they want
to be a a part of. So
there is that demand for
corporate bonds and for US equity, which
is coming again both from domestic
investors, but also from international
investors, which you know, where AI is
the trade. I mean, that's where all the
dynamism is and that's where people
want to to park their money. Now,
we've we've pointed at all the reasons
why rates
uh are likely to stay high. But I just
want to point out that we, since we
still have the ongoing
Iran conflict and we still have the
Strait of Hormuz closed,
if it that is not resolved and you in
any time soon, like you know, the next
month or so,
>> Yeah.
>> and you see a even steeper increase in
oil prices, in crude prices going up to
say $160 a barrel, which is what some of
the projections would be in that case,
then we could see much less much more
demand destruction that we are seeing
today. And we could be back in that
space where at least at the short end,
interest rates are being cut pretty
rapidly.
>> I want to on this question, going back
to the effect that the AI build-out is
having across rates and bonds and so
forth. I want to sort of get some
clarification here of what either you or
we economists
mean when they talk about say like
crowding out, because there's one
version of it that is like, okay, there
is a lot of there is a lot of debt being
issued right now by very highly rated
companies, probably yields a little bit
more than US government bonds, that is
attractive for investors perhaps.
There's and maybe that has some sort of
crowding out in the financial markets.
The other way that one could that I tend
to think of crowding out is that these
AI
the AI build-out is like, they're taking
up all of the wind turbines, they're
taking up all of the trucking capacity
to get the goods to the data centers,
they're taking up all the skilled
contractors and laborers within the
regions that these data centers are
being built, and that creates
inflationary pressure that adds to the
strain, and therefore all things being
equal that says higher inflation higher
rates for longer to maintain that. Which
of those two models, whether it's the
sort of financial markets version or the
sort of real economy version, is a more
useful way of thinking about that
linkage between private and public
sector spending / debt?
>> So, both of those are in play right now.
So, that's the difference between what's
happening to real rates versus what's
happening to nominal rates.
>> Okay.
>> And what's happening to the pricing of
the Fed Fed rate path, right? So, the
first channel that you mentioned, which
is just the fact that there is so much
of
demand from the private markets for the
AI investors for cap
you know, AI companies for capital is
going to raise real rates, you know,
even if there is no effect on inflation
or inflation expectations are not
moving, we should expect to see real
rates rise. Uh and that's certainly
we're seeing some of that. And then the
other is the effect that's working
through the demand for the different
inputs that go into AI and that's
creating an inflationary pressure, which
would then
need higher nominal rates. Uh and that
is also you know, playing out. I think
right now, I I suspect that the real
rate piece is more important. The
inflationary part is being driven a lot
by what's happening with energy prices
and the pass-through from
[clears throat] energy prices into also
core inflation. So, I think that's the
more of the the, you know, the higher
inflation, higher rate path story is
coming from other forces on inflation as
opposed to what's coming from uh AI
itself. And then you have the real rate
path, which is going up also because of
the general risk risky environment that
we're in, but also because of what's
coming from this increase in uh you
know, capital demand coming from the AI
sector.
>> So, one of the reasons we wanted to
speak with you is because you do have
that very significant policy experience.
And so, when faced with, you know,
potentially rising real rates because of
an AI boom, what should policy makers be
doing here? Because, you know, certainly
in the US, we've already seen some Fed
officials or outgoing Fed officials
start to argue that they can look
through the AI boom and its impact on
inflation. But if real rates are, you
know, structurally rising, if R-star is
structurally higher than it was before,
is that the right move?
>> So, I mean, what matters crucially is
what we believe are the main drivers of
R-star at this moment.
Is it coming because of higher
productivity growth, which is then
leading to higher investment, and
therefore demand for capital? You know,
all of that is good as a kind of the
good kind of increase in R-star, because
that's an economy economy that is going
to is projected to grow at a faster
rate. Uh and that helps. That helps on
many fronts, including in terms of
bringing debt to GDP down.
The
The other reason R-star is going up is
because of the increase in fiscal
deficits, and just general high levels
of government borrowing in the US. That
is less appealing, because that tends to
be not necessarily growth enhancing.
That, you know, the money that's being
raised is not for
you know, productive, necessarily
productive infrastructure investment
that's going to generate enough growth.
So, that's more problematic, because
it's just generating high R-star without
generating the higher growth that comes
with that should come with it. And that
can be a problem.
From a policymaker's perspective, of
course, you have to firstly be able to
tell where what is driving the R-star.
Is it a good kind or is it a bad kind?
But regardless, if R-star is drifting up
and you have an inflation target of 2%,
you are
looking at higher nominal interest
rates. Right? So, right now the Fed has
an R-star forecast of about 1%. You put
2% inflation on top of that as their
target, we're looking at 3% uh nominal
rates, which is a clear shift away from
what it used to be pre-pandemic.
Then you have to check to see whether
the R-star increase is actually slowing
the economy down or the increase in your
nominal rates is slowing the economy
down, and how much higher than that R
star do you have to be to be able to
bring
inflation down because there is
obviously above target inflation in the
US at this moment.
That is now the big question whether the
air productivity boom is going to mean
that you don't need that much of a
above R star interest rate or do we have
many too many other forces coming from
energy prices passing through into core
inflation,
the lesser lower levels of immigration
in the country,
just general trade disruptions, supply
chain disruptions, and those are the
main drivers in case in which case maybe
you need to keep interest rates even
higher.
So, being able to tease that apart is
where
you know, I think that's where the the
the tough decisions are.
But, what is squarely
the case is that we are looking at
higher nominal interest rates, I mean,
regardless of whether R star is coming
from the good kind or the bad kind.
>> You know, there is this fantasy and
hopefully it comes true, but there is
certainly this fantasy of a lot of
people who are into AI which I would
think is called they would call like the
disinflationary boom, right? So, the
let's just imagine we have extremely
powerful artificial intelligence that is
capable of delivering,
you know, incredible material gains for
people. It makes healthcare really easy
and quick. It can power robots that care
for us. It can build things, etc.
We're not and meanwhile the cost of
commodities collapses, maybe the cost of
labor collapses.
Is that a Is that a scenario in which
it's worth contemplating and thinking
about what So, everything gets really
cheap because it all gets super
automated, but also our standards of
living rise dramatically because the AI
takes care of it for us. Is that
conceivable? Like
from an eco If you just from an
economist's perspective, is there such
thing as the disinflationary boom or the
deflationary boom even?
>> So, this is about, uh, you know, making
a distinction between now and what comes
next. Yeah. Now, clearly, it is about
the high levels of investments.
>> Right. Like, clearly right now, it's
pushing everything up. But, let's
imagine 10 years from now and we've done
it. We have this incredible And somehow
we've solved all the sci-fi stuff and
we're good so that the AI doesn't want
to kill us all, etc. Let's just imagine
the rosy scenario in which we have this
like incredible
>> under-discussed risk factors in the
scenario.
>> right? Like, let's just say
>> robots don't kill us.
>> Assuming we solve that and the AI works
on our behalf and it does what we want
it to do and it can create incredible
material gains while also make while
also very deliver it cheaply cuz it's
just one AI, etc. Is that a
contemplatable possible
um scenario from an economist's
perspective?
>> There is absolutely a scenario where we
could be in that wonderful place with
high productivity growth at the same
time we don't have civil unrest or,
you know,
rogue forces using AI for for ill.
That is a scenario, but I do not know a
single person who will put a probability
on that scenario and say that that's
going to happen,
you know, with a significant amount of
certainty.
>> Yeah.
>> There is a very high degree of
uncertainty and there are several who
also believe that it's yet to be seen
whether there is going to be any major
productivity gain of the kind that, you
know, there are analysts who believe
that productivity could go up by two
percentage points a year,
you know, over and above what's where it
is right now, which is around two
percentage point a year. I mean, that is
huge.
There is no evidence right now of that
kind of productivity wave coming
through. So, it's early, but you know, I
use the technology and I
find it terrific. I mean, it is it's
been really great for my own
productivity. Uh it's not affecting my
wages or anything so far, but it's it's
there. It is it is
it is you know, very valuable
technology, but there is a lot of
uncertainty and which is what is very
curious about the markets, right?
Because on the one hand, it is
impressive where the stock markets are
again at the close to a record high.
Uh and maybe you know, one can explain
that by this by saying that well, there
is a scenario where everything goes
perfectly well.
But there are so many other scenarios
that could play out between now and next
year or even 2 years from now. And you
barely see that price being priced in
markets and I think that's frankly more
surprising than just looking at what's
happening with just the level of
you know, of the stock market.
>> Okay, we keep talking about the stock
market and um you know, debt issuance in
the corporate bond market and how
everyone wants a piece of AI. Does that
basically mean that we're seeing
I guess maybe scarcity of capital versus
the global we used to call it a global
savings club in the early 2000s, right?
Which ended up
Perp and Anky pushing yields lower.
Does anyone still talk about a savings
club or should we all be talking about,
you know, like capital scarcity?
>> No, we don't have a global savings glut
anymore and proof of that is real rates
going up, interest rates going up. So,
that's so that's that. What we certainly
seem to have in the US is I don't know
what to call it, but you know, a
gelatinous demand for US equity.
>> Yeah.
>> Coming both from domestic investors, but
also from foreign investors. It's I
mean, we're at 40 trillion in terms of
foreign holdings of US equities. That is
at a historic high even if you look at
it as a share of the rest of the world's
GDP, it's about twice as
high as it what it was just before the
2000 dot com bust. I guess at the peak
of the dot com.
Uh it So, this is uh you know, the world
has never been that invested in US
equity markets. It's like it's the only
game in town. So, you know, if there's a
glut if there is a glut in the rather, I
would say it is for
uh US US equities.
We're all in this together. And and as
we know in terms of what's coming into
the markets uh right now, I mean, we
have some very big IPOs and uh that will
make us even more all tied at the hip
when it comes to AI and stock markets.
>> Speaking of um big IPOs, Tracy, Ryan,
this reminds me and I'm saying this to
message to our producers, we should
really do an episode um soon about
>> including voice memos to producers in
episodes?
>> memos to producers. No, I really want to
do an episode soon about the fact that
all the big index funds are going to
have to include companies at basically
their peak where you think like
historically okay, like a company like
Apple like it enters the S&P 500 at I
don't know, maybe 20 billion dollar
market cap and then it's a
multi-trillion dollar market cap. This
will be the first time that the index
fund owners are going to eventually have
to buy these really big companies
without having ever experienced any of
the gains from the run-up and I think
that's like going to be a historic
moment for both markets, indexing, and
ETFs and passive.
>> one of my long-running criticisms of the
big benchmark index providers which is
like they always say that they're not
making investment judgments. They're
just holding up a mirror to the market,
but like actually a lot of these
decisions are like incredibly embedded
with judgment calls and they do end up
having an impact on the entire market.
>> Yeah, we we this is this is I think
going to be a historic time for sort of
index investing. Anyway, I know that
this is a divergence. I just needed to
get that voice memo into our producers.
>> Yes, I mean what we as you know, hey,
there are now more ETFs than there are
actually companies being created on the
market. So, if one needs to if you
wanted to spend a lot of time picking
and choosing, you could be you could be
selective, too.
>> Yeah, I want to switch ETFs, but then I
have to take a capital gains hit. So, I
can't you know, this is the Anyway,
we're we're getting pretty pretty
sidetracked here. I want to talk more I
mean, there are many phenomenons or many
things going on at once.
But when we think about these pressures,
one of and it relates to AI, but it also
relates to commodities itself, is this
idea of essentially national resource
hoarding and the decline of sort of free
trade. And so, the fact is it's like you
maybe at one point we could say, you
know what? A country could say, you know
what? It's great that America is
building a bunch of fighter jets, so we
don't have to have our own indigenous
fighter jet industry, etc. How much when
you look at what's going on with the
rates picture and pushing up inflation
and so forth, is this phenomenon in
which no country fully trusts other
countries to deliver goods for them and
therefore there's a lot of replication
or duplication of capital investment
capital investment happening in every
country all at once simultaneously?
>> We're seeing a lot of that. I mean, we
moved squarely
firmly, decisively away from
a pure efficiency-based
model of I'm going to buy from the
cheapest place and I'm going to sell if
I'm the cheapest source
to one where everybody is building up
their own capacity as much as they can
and of course depending on the country
and depending on how much of a fiscal
space you have that can be a a small
group of things or a big group of
things. For sure energy security is
is everybody's paying attention to it.
Um how do we make sure that we don't
have to import fuel from the rest of the
world and how can we have our own fuel
at home either through renewables, you
know, whatever we need to do or maybe
just returning to coal for now.
That is we're going to see we're seeing
that. Defense expenditure, we need to be
able to not just spend more on defense
but make sure that we can actually
produce more of that of the of the
weapons that we need.
Semiconductor chips, rare earths. Yes,
there are
you know, I think there's so little
trust in the world right now in terms of
relying on your trading partners
that countries are just going to be
spending a lot more on this. It's just
that it depends on whether you're a
country that can afford to raise the
finances for it or not and but everybody
is heading in that direction. So if you
look at the list of
of you know, all the sources of demand
for capital, that is a very very long
list. And if you look at the sources of
supply of capital, there's just one
category which is aging demographics. I
mean that's
you know, we often tend to blame old
people for the fact that we need to
spend so much on retirement and on
health and
for their for their future but the truth
is
the reason interest rates are not much
more higher than they would have been is
because of the supply of savings coming
from aging demographics around the
world.
>> Well, you mentioned fiscal space and I
know you've talked previously about the
need to you know, reduce some
entitlement
spending if governments are going to be
serious about reducing deficits.
And yet we've seen numerous attempts in
the developed world to actually cut back
on government spending, and it seems
very, very hard to do in elected
democracies, right? Like, it is not a
popular platform to be elected and say
what we really need is austerity for the
longer term, and all of you are going to
have to suffer in the near term. How are
policy makers like realistically
supposed to navigate that tension,
assuming that they're up for election
every two to four years?
>> I mean, we have the additional problem
that I think policy makers actually are
not really keen
or particularly worried about where
their debt to GDP is. If you look around
the world, again, except for places
where the bond markets are simply just
not letting you do more spending.
Uh even in the US, uh it you know, you
just I don't believe there's anybody in
Congress who's truly worried
There are sorry, not there are a couple
in Congress who are worried about the US
debt level, but not enough given where
debt levels are and given the
force, you know, foreseeable path of
spending that's happening. But again,
it's just step back and see it's helpful
to look at what has happened
historically and when have countries
been able and how have they been able to
bring their debt to GDP levels down.
It's a couple of things.
It is one is just a spurt of growth
uh that has come about either because
you are some sort of a commodity
exporter and you just had a positive
terms of trade shock, and because of
that you your debt to
>> You hit the jackpot, basically.
>> Yes, exactly. You got lucky. Or
productivity growth, a boom, higher
above-average growth, and I believe
that's what we're betting on this time
with the AI. The hope is that with AI we
will get growth from 2% up to 4%, and
then that will suddenly solve all of our
problems if we have that on a persistent
basis. But that's tend countries,
especially developed countries, have
tended to rely on that.
And then you have inflation.
If you go back even further and also
obviously during right after the
pandemic, inflation helped bring the two
GDP levels down. And then of course the
third is what we see with developing
countries is you end up with with
default and restructuring and crisis.
Uh and then again, uh you you bring a
debt to GDP down that way. So, those
have been the typical path. Uh
We've never had to worry about debt
crises in developed economies, but but
now more and more and I think this is
also a new feature of the world we live
in is the developed world uh is moving
into that space where their debt
costs and their borrowing costs are far
more volatile, far more sensitive to
market conditions. I mean the stark case
is the UK where you see that on a
day-to-day basis, but you know, you see
that in other countries too in Europe
and
uh some of it in France. And more
generally, even Japan where for the
longest time we didn't have to worry
about borrowing costs, those have
squarely moved up. The 10-year rates
have moved up. Uh you know, Germany's
10-year rates have moved up. So,
everywhere we are seeing developed
economies also now
having to face higher uh borrowing
costs. The US I think is still
the exception in the sense that even
though 10-year yields are at say 4 and
1/2% right now,
just given the level of supply of of
debt and what's expected to come out in
the future,
I mean markets are still
treating it as have giving it some
privilege even if it was not as big as
it used to be in the past.
>> What does a in your view a debt
crisis look like in a country that
borrows in its own currency? Because
obviously like technically speaking, we
know politically, you know, maybe the
debt ceiling doesn't get raised. There
were certainly political ways to
default, but economically the
the US never theoretically has to run
out of dollars per se. In fact, I would
say it's the you would say it's the same
thing with the UK. You say it's the same
thing with Japan. There's you know,
they're not going to they can't run out
of yen the same way in the same way that
say an emerging market that borrows in a
foreign currency could theoretically run
out of dollar reserves, which is why we
watch reserve levels when we talk about
sort of on the edge emerging market. To
you, what does a debt crisis look like
in an advanced economy in which all of
its debt is denominated in its own
currency?
>> A crisis in
uh you know, in a a developed economy
would look more like a a credit crunch
that then leads into a financial crisis.
So, we would see a sharp increase in
borrowing costs.
That will affect many other asset
classes. You would see a slump in
investment
uh the economy. So, it's it's this debt
overhang, the high levels of debt and
that you have to roll over on a on a
daily basis. That overhang which slows
growth, slows dynamism.
Uh that is what a typical crisis looks
like. And yes, you can have financial
crises.
One of the wonderful things about the
last several years despite all the
shocks, we haven't had a financial
crisis in a developed world or in an
emerging market any big emerging market.
Uh and that has been
very helpful to bring back a fast
recovery of the world economy every time
after every shock. And we talk about
resilience. So,
in a case where
we end up with just let debt levels that
are really high, it's just costs going
up everywhere and that will eventually
slow down economies if not just trigger
a financial crisis right away given how
sanguine financial conditions have been.
>> What happened? You mentioned that one of
the things that's changed pre- to
post-pandemic has been the
change in marginal position of central
bankers with respect to the bond market
and the fact that they've gone from
being often, although even in the US, I
mean, quantitative easing ended in the
2010s, etc. But what happens if say we
talk about
central bank in one of these developed
markets and they say, "You know what?
We're going to We're going to cap the
long end. We're going to We're going to
buy bonds until the rates are long
held You know, they don't go above 2% or
3% or etc. Seems very plausible that
something like that could happen in the
developed market before too long. What
would be the sort of fallout if a
central bank explicitly came out and
said we are going to buy government debt
and just hold down the rates in a very
explicit manner like that?
>> If a central bank comes out and says
that
we are, you know,
different from our mandate of
>> Yeah.
>> price stability and full employment,
regardless of what's happening there, we
are going to go out and buy
>> Yeah.
>> long-term debt, then that's what's going
to happen is you're going to see
inflation expectations drift up and then
the nominal rates are going to go up and
real rates will also go up because of
the risk associated with inflation
premium will go up. And that will be,
you know, the end of the wonderful era
that we've had of
central bank independence and that's
helping to keep interest rates low. So,
that strategy just doesn't exist. You
can play for it for a little while, but
eventually it gets priced into markets.
So, I mean, unless, of course, it is a
tool for monetary policy because you've
hit the zero lower bound
>> Sure.
>> and you still need to stimulate the
economy, then you do that. But right now
we are far from the situation.
>> Right, they are that we currently have
the opposite situation.
>> We have the opposite. So it is,
you know, countries try have tried it in
the past and these are usually the
countries that the IMF works with
because they eventually find themselves
in crisis.
But what typically happens is you get a
tiny period when it looks like this is
helping and then you just get much
higher interest rates and
you just don't get any of the benefits
of the central bank buying your debt.
>> You know, you mentioned earlier that we
haven't really had major financial
crisis in recent years and if we could
just broaden that idea out a little bit,
I think that
the resilience of the global economy and
certainly the US economy has been
surprising to a lot of people. We've had
multiple shocks, but overall
certainly in America people just keep
spending, everything kind of keeps
ticking along.
Is there something that economists are
maybe like underestimating when it comes
to why
it seems like again, the global economy
to a lesser extent, but certainly the US
economy seems so resilient in the face
of all these once-in-a-lifetime shocks
that we keep saying?
>> It's been a combination of things that
have helped and some of it have been
surprises.
Again, since we're talking about debt,
that increase in debt has come about
because of the very large
amount of support that governments
around the world paid gave during each
of these crises. So during the pandemic,
I mean advanced economies spent about
25% of GDP.
If you look at a combination of not just
outright support, but all kinds of loan
guarantees and equity infusions and so
on,
that was huge. That was those were much
higher levels than anything we'd seen
in you know, in recent times. And
because of that,
you know, households and businesses came
out of the pandemic with stronger
balance sheets than they did going in.
And And that has helped hold up demand
also, and also has helped therefore
helps hold up profitability in a lot of
businesses because of that strength that
came from all that large amount of of
support.
That was one. Second is the AI boom is
has is a big player right now. And if we
didn't have AI and if we didn't have the
increase in demand coming from AI, we
would be looking at just much lower
growth rates in many parts of the world
at this time. And we would also see
trade being much weaker. I mean, trade
is being held up a lot by AI inputs
flowing around. That
That's also been a big contributor. So,
we've had these positive offsetting
events.
The question is, what happens in the
next crisis? In the next crisis,
we countries do not have the fiscal
space to provide that kind of support.
And we may see much less resilience than
we've seen
the last few years. I mean, I think
that's something we should keep in mind.
I don't think we should take this
resilience as some sort of an an
absolute structural shift that keeps
economies growing at their, you know,
long-term trends regardless of how big
the shock is that's affecting them.
>> You wrote a piece, I think, recently for
the Financial Times which you talked
about the bliss trade, I think as you
called it. And could you
clarify because it sounds like expand on
this idea that there is this assumption
of state support. There's an assumption
of a backstop. Things go bad, the
government will be able to do something.
And this is seems to be the core of your
idea that this is mistaken.
>> We have this mindset right now in in
policy in the policy world
and therefore people are investing in
markets that the state is there to fix a
a lot of the problems and we see it
right away even now what's happening
with energy prices going up is that
there are many countries that are
capping fuel prices that are cutting
energy taxes
it the instinctive reaction is to
protect households and protect their
spending power
and when you do that that helps
corporate profitability and that is
going to be favorable for markets so
we've been in this environment now
either explicitly or implicitly I mean
there there has to be this notion that
the economy has been resilient
and it is a reflection of
the the bliss what I call the bliss
which is big lasting state support which
has helped economies
all over the world not just in you know
the US but in many other countries so
the expectation is that that will
continue and
going back to where we started this
conversation just given how high debt
levels are
you know that's just increasingly
questionable which means that I think
governments are going to move towards
far more unorthodox approaches including
price controls financial repression you
know the kinds of things that we haven't
encouraged in a long time
>> You know we've talked about some of the
big structural phenomenons in the global
economy the AI boom demographic certain
things with trade there's one thing we
haven't really talked about which is I
something I think about which is that
if a country makes something physical
there is a very good chance that either
right now or in the future China will be
able to make it cheaper and better and
this is no matter what it is there's
still some things that aren't the case
the most advanced semiconductors aren't
manufactured in
in China. uh
Uh
Boeing Boeing and Airbus jets and stuff.
There's a few examples, but by and
large, when you think about the stresses
that are being placed on economies all
around the world, how much is this
particular dimension um a factor, the
fact that like any almost any tradeable
good might at some point be most
efficiently
uh or originate from China?
>> Yeah, I read a lot of pieces on this
that somehow the China will
continue to run
trade surpluses because everything it
wants it wants it produces for itself
and produces for the rest of the world
and so that's that. I mean that that
makes little sense to me.
>> Okay.
>> Firstly, if you just look at China's
spending behavior,
they you know, they run a surpluses
surplus on their goods trade front, but
they run a deficit on their services
trade front. And so one of the reasons
why China's overall deficit
uh you know, current account deficit or
trade deficit is around 3% of GDP as
compared to the 10% of G GDP before the
great financial crisis is because they
are big consumers of services around the
world. Chinese tourism
uh has been a big contributor to incomes
around the world and the service deficit
that they run.
So So just that, right? So there's
nothing there's no sense in which
China ultimately gets to do everything.
Secondly, usually if you get to a point
where
you are you're so successful if you're
so good at manufacturing making
everything,
you ultimately are going to have very
high levels of investment that
given the level of savings in your
country,
that usually means that you start
running trade deficits, right? So, it
cannot be a story of China being very
successful in its investment and being
very productive. Because any kind of
high productivity investment boom story
means the country running deficits.
What has happened in China is basically
very a lot of consumption suppression.
Because of that you're seeing uh
surpluses that you that the country is
running.
And we're also now seeing all the
problems of very high levels of
investment that's come from the fact of
the crash in the property market, which
despite the last 4 years of
interventions and government policies is
actually looking quite bad. So, the
weakness in the property market is the
weakness in consumption.
Uh you know, if China is going is
running surpluses at this point, it is
because investment has dropped in China.
You have
uh that's come both from the property
market crash, but also because of all
the
uh you know, excess supply and the
overcapacity that they've created.
You've seen a decline in investment. So,
2025 was the first year when investment
in China actually declined. That
explains why it's running a big trade
surplus. Now, yes, there are
uh a lot of exports coming out of China.
Forget about the surplus deficit part,
but just the fact that they're sending a
lot of goods out of their country is a
source of competition for manufacturers
around the world. I believe that this is
not sustainable. I don't think Europe or
other Asian economies in East Asia are
going to just say, "Well, that's okay.
We are okay with China dumping all these
goods on us."
They're going to put tariffs on China.
China is aware of that, which is also
partly why they're trying to, you know,
see how they
can manage their own exports to some
extent.
They will move in that direction. But I
I I'm not a buyer of the whole China
produces everything and the but does
everything on its own and somehow we
still continue buying from China. That
makes no sense to me.
>> You know, just going back to the
beginning of this conversation, I
mentioned a bit of a deja vu feeling
because we do have these bond sell-offs
from time to time and we often record
podcast episodes on them. And the idea
of a debt crisis has also been a popular
theme on many podcasts, not just ours.
What are you Do you have any sense of
what a catalyst for, you know, this
actually exploding into a real-life debt
crisis could be? Or are there certain
levels or numbers or behaviors that you
kind of watch out for from from here?
>> I think it's very important uh what's
going to happen with AI and the
productivity boom that we are hoping
for. Uh I mean, that is going to be very
important. If it turns out that there is
very little
showing up in productivity from AI or we
have a setback that comes from just
discovering that oh, there's so much of
hallucination that it's just you can't
really use it for anything very
important.
If that's the case, then I I could see a
situation where the pricing of debt uh
you know,
it drops even more. It's a lot more
concern about what's going to happen in
terms of governments' uh ability to
repay all the debt that they have and
not just now, but that's expected to
come into the future. So, for me, that's
one thing. I mean, what's It is
important that there is growth in the
economy and that that growth is coming
from good places. At this point, it
seems like the growth is coming from AI
investment.
Uh and the hope that it's going to
generate all that productivity growth.
If that story goes away, we have a a
problem in terms of the concerns around
fiscal positions around the world.
>> Gita, thank you so much for coming on. I
thought it's truly the the perfect guest
for this moment in time. We really
appreciate it.
>> Thank you. It was a lot of fun.
>> Joe, here is my overwhelming takeaway
from that discussion.
>> There is so much riding on AI.
>> Yeah.
>> Right? Like like honestly, like
the last answer is like, well, it kind
of all depends on economic growth and
whether we get that productivity boost
via AI.
>> Yeah.
>> Like the idea that the entire sort of
Western economic model and I guess
social compact with governments is now
dependent on whether AI actually does
what it says on on the label on the tin
is is nuts.
>> Yeah, I mean, the numbers are obviously
just extraordinarily big and they're so
you know, they're and they're affecting
everything and they're obviously it
shows up in financial markets, but also
shows up in the real economy. It is a
major force of sustained upward
pressure. Yeah, I think there's no
disputing that. It's like we have all
become uh we're all watching along sort
of like eating popcorn and knowing that
our fates will somehow and I'm serious,
you know,
>> So, Gita said it really well, which is
like we're all basically in the AI trade
together whether you want to be or not.
>> No, I know and it's like, you know, I
look at my like very passively
diversified um retirement money. I'm
like, I'm such a genius these days, you
know, cuz it's like cuz you don't even
have to be an AI stock.
>> Conversely though, do you feel pressure
to keep spending on tokens in order to
support [laughter] equity market
valuations?
>> Yes, and I keep like Yes, that's right.
I keep like thinking of more tests that
I can do with AI because like, oh, I
need to make sure the tokens are
boosted. No, it's really wild. It's a it
really is everything and then you I
mean, this gets and then the whole
conversation is like, man, the last 6
years have been crazy.
>> Mhm.
>> Crazy.
>> Like seriously. No, seriously guys.
>> I have a voice memo for producers, which
is we need to clip that quote of Joe
going crazy.
>> You just think of all the things that
have happened in the last six years.
Woo.
And so I guess I'm not surprised at all
by the market regime shift during that
time.
>> about this idea that like there is this
assumption in markets that well, we got
through the last like 18
once-in-a-lifetime
crisis just fine. And so we'll manage to
get through the next one, but then the
question is fiscal capacity and I guess
political will.
>> It's both of those. And it's like you
know, the way I think about it and Japan
I think is an instructive example here,
which is that like when I think of
fiscal capacity,
I don't think of like
a sort of like oh, if you have 80%
debt-to-GDP level, you have fiscal
capacity. If you have 120%, you don't
because we don't know where if there is
that number. But what you do know and
what we can say is that in a period of
high inflation and in a period where
where resources are already constrained
>> Mhm.
>> and governments have made a commitment,
say, to seniors that their you know,
that their standard of living will be X.
And governments have made a
commitment to so-and-so, defense that
it's not going to drop below X. That
once a lot of these certain sort of
commitments have been made, if you get
another shock in which you say, "Okay,
let's just God forbid. Let's just say
there were another pandemic in which a
bunch of people temporarily tried to do
the same playbook again and it's like,
"Okay, we're going to
replace your lost income for a few
months." Um well, at a time in which
we're already very like resource
constrained, you see how that just
becomes, you know, there's a lag period
where it's like instantly inflationary
because we're already sort of That's the
difference of in 20 in early 2020 and
late 2019, we were not pushing against
our real resource limits in the way that
we appear to be right now.
>> Yeah, I think that's right. Okay, well,
on that happy note, shall we leave it
there?
>> leave it there.
>> Okay, this has been another episode of
the All Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Alloway. You can follow me at Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Gita Gopinath. She is at Gita Gopinath.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman, Dash Bennett at Dash but,
Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks, and Kevin
Lozano at Kevin Lloyd Lozano.
>> And for more All Thoughts content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at
bloomberg.com/allthoughts.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our discord,
discord.gg/allthoughts.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please leave a comment or like the
video or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> [music]